.. raw:: pdf

   OddPageBreak cutePage

Appendix E: Meat Curing Salts
*****************************

Guide to Nitrites, Prague Powder, and Other Curing Salts
========================================================

Picture the incarnadine color of corned beef and pastrami. The
shimmering translucence and satin texture of Spanish lomo (cured pork
loin) and bresaola and bündnerfleisch (respectively, Italian and Swiss
air-dried beef). The rich hammy flavor of bacon, prosciutto, and jamon
serrano. The complex umami flavors, not to mention the remarkable shelf
life of dry-cured sausage and salami.

All owe these hunger-inducing attributes to substances steeped in
ancient tradition and modern controversy-sodium nitrate (NaNO3) and
sodium nitrite (NaNO2)-the active ingredients in curing salts. (Nitrates
have three oxygen atoms for every nitrogen atom; the nitrites have two
oxygen atoms for every nitrogen atom. As preservatives, both function
more or less the same way.)

Food preservation has ranked high on the human priority list ever since
Homo sapiens took control of the food chain. As early as 12,000 years
ago, our Neolithic ancestors discovered that salt could retard spoilage
by drawing moisture out of food. And that salt from certain mines not
only did a better job of preserving food, but also made it taste better.

The ancient egyptians used the technique, as did the Chinese. The
ancient Romans were the first to record the color- and flavor-enhancing
effect of nitrates/nitrites on animal proteins.

But it wasn’t until the early twentieth century that scientists
identified the connection between these naturally occurring compounds
and the suppression of food-borne illnesses like Clostridium botulinum
(botulism) and Listeria monocytogenes.

In 1925, one Karl Max Seifert, took out a U.S. patent for a meat cure
called “Prague Powder”-subsequently sold to the Illinois-based Griffith
Laboratories in 1934. Whatever link the substance had to the capital of
the Czech Republic has been lost to history.

We know what you’re thinking-and we sense your unease: Don’t
nitrates/nitrites cause cancer? Isn’t that why people buy anemic-looking
uncured bacon and nitrate-free hot dogs the color of the cardboard boxes
they’re shipped in? You may remember the controversy that flared in the
mid-1970s over nitrates/nitrites-but missed the news that curing salts
were effectively cleared of the charges. In fact, the National
Toxicology Program, an agency within the U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, conducted a multi-year study to evaluate the safety of
sodium nitrite. The conclusion? When used at FDA-approved levels,
nitrite is not only safe, but may help counter heart attacks, vascular
problems, and sickle cell disease.

Still skeptical? According to the American Meat Institute, roughly 93
percent of our daily intake of nitrites (the chemical cousin of
nitrates) comes from leafy vegetables and tubers. The maximum amount of
nitrites allowed in cured meats by the United States Department of
Agriculture (USDA) is 156 parts per million (ppm), and is usually lower
than that. In contrast, spinach, lettuce, celery, beets, radishes, and
carrots can contain up to 1900 ppm! As far as I know, no one’s sounding
the alarm on these vegetables.

And those uncured hot dogs or bacon you’ve been conscientiously paying
more for? Most are processed using celery or beet juice, whose nitrates
turn into nitrites when they react with the saliva in your mouth. In
many cases, they potentially contain more nitrites than traditionally
cured meats.

But please note: Nitrates and nitrites can be toxic when not used at
recommended levels. That’s why most curing salts are tinted pink-to make
sure you don’t confuse them with ordinary table salt. (Do not confuse
them with Himalayan pink salt, either.)

While curing salts might seem like an obscure subject, a growing number
of home pit masters-not to mention recent grads of Barbecue
University™-have taken to curing and smoking their own bacon, pastrami,
jerky, etc.

Interested? I thought so.

So here’s a guide to the various curing salts and what you use them for.

Prague Powder No 1
------------------

Also called pink curing salt, InstaCure #1, sel rose, Quick Cure, tinted
curing mixture (TCM), Modern Cure, and DQ Cure. Cures are used to
prevent meats from spoiling when being cooked or smoked at low
temperatures (under 200°F). This cure is 1 part sodium nitrite (6.25%)
and 16 parts salt (93.75%) and are combined and crystallized to assure
even distribution. As the meat temperate rises during processing, the
sodium nitrite changes to nitric oxide and starts to ‘gas out’ at about
130°F. After the smoking /cooking process is complete only about 10-20%
of the original nitrite remains. As the product is stored and later
reheated for consumption, the decline of nitrite continues. 4 ounces of
Prague powder #1 is required to cure 100 lbs of meat. A more typical
measurement for home use is 1 level tsp per 5 lbs of meat. As some of
its alternate names imply, it works quickly. Meats like sausage can be
smoked or cooked right away. If brining, use 3 ounces per gallon of
water and allow enough time for the salts to penetrate the food, usually
24 hours. Follow the manufacturer’s directions carefully. Again,
nitrates/nitrites can be toxic when not used in the recommended
proportions. Use for wet-cured hams, jerky, salami, pastrami, sausage,
cured fish, corned beef, and bacon.

Prague Powder No 2
------------------

Sometimes sold as InstaCure #2 or Slow Cure is a mixture of 1 part
sodium nitrite, .64 parts sodium nitrate and 16 parts salt. (1 oz. of
sodium nitrite with .64 oz. of sodium nitrate to each lb. of salt.),
this coral-colored compound contains 6.25 percent sodium nitrite, 4%
sodium nitrate, and 89.75% sodium chloride (salt). While Prague Powder
#1 works quickly to cure meats, the antimicrobial powers of Prague
Powder #2 are released over time (weeks or months versus days) as the
nitrates morph into nitrites. Use 1 oz. of cure for 25 lbs. of meat or 1
level teaspoon of cure for 5 lbs. of meat when mixing with meat. When
using a cure in a brine solution, follow a recipe. Use for products that
will be dry-cured for an extended time, and that do not require cooking,
smoking, or refrigeration, such as country-style hams, prosciutto,
salami, pepperoni, and other dry sausages.

Note: Prague Powder #2 is not sold in Canada, where nitrates are
prohibited.

Morton Tender Quick
-------------------

Morton® Tender Quick®: This product has no alternate names. Sold at the
retail level in 2-pound bags, Tender Quick® contains salt, sugar (also a
preservative), an anti-caking agent, and one-half percent each of sodium
nitrite and sodium nitrate. It is less concentrated than other curing
salts, and unlike the salts above, is not pink. The company’s
recommended formula for dry cures is one tablespoon of Tender Quick® for
every pound of meat. For a wet brine, add one cup of Tender Quick® to
four cups of water. Use for cured and smoked meat, poultry, game, and
fish, such as salmon, shad, and sablefish.

On a side note, Tender Quick® is sometimes used to “hack” a smoke ring.
Unscrupulous competitors on the barbecue circuit sometimes “paint” their
meats with a mixture of Tender Quick® and water to fake or exaggerate a
reddish-pink smoke ring. For the record, contests sanctioned by the
Kansas City Barbecue Society (KCBS) no longer include smoke rings in
their judging criteria.

Morton Sugar Cure
-----------------

Morton® Sugar Cure® (Plain): Like the Tender Quick® above, this product
from salt purveyor Morton® contains both sodium nitrite and nitrate. But
some of the salt is replaced by sugar, making it an excellent choice for
bacon, hams, and jerky. Follow package directions. Not sold in Canada.

Morton Smoke Flavored Sugar Cure
--------------------------------

Morton® Sugar Cure® (Smoke Flavored): Recommended by the company for
long dry cures (not brines), this product is chemically similar to the
Morton® Sugar Cure® above. But it also contains hickory smoke flavoring,
spices, and dextrose. Often used for hams or bacon.

Summary
-------

-  Prague powder #1 is a mixture of 1 part sodium nitrite and 16 parts
   salt. You normally use 1 level teaspoon of cure for 5 lb. of meat.
   Used at any time meat is not immediately put into freezer or
   refrigerator, Such as smoking, air drying, dehumidifying, etc. This
   is similar to and sometimes called Curing Salt.
-  Prague powder #2 is a mixture of 1 part sodium nitrite,.64 parts
   sodium nitrate and 16 parts salt. You normally use 1 level teaspoon
   of cure for 5 lb. of meat. mainly used for products that will be air
   cured for long time like: Country Ham, salami, peperoni, and other
   dry sausages.
-  Instacure 1 is a mixture of 1oz of Sodium Nitrite (6.25 %) to 1 lb of
   salt. Used at any time meat is not immediately put into freezer or
   refrigerator, Such as smoking, air drying, dehumidifying, etc.
-  Instacure 2 is a mixture of 1 oz of Sodium Nitrite (6.25 %) along
   with .64 oz od Sodium Nitrate (4 %) to 1 lb of salt. mainly used for
   products that will be air cured for long time like: Country Ham,
   salami, peperoni, and other dry sausages. Note: The Curing Salts
   above contain FDA approved red coloring agent that gives them a
   slight pink color thus eliminating any possible confusion with common
   salt
-  Morton’s Tender Quick is a mixture of salt, sodium nitrite, sodium
   nitrate and sugar. You normally use 1 level tablespoon of cure for 1
   lb. of meat.
-  Saltpeter is potassium nitrate and is also used as a curing agent but
   I know
-  Pink salt or Instacure no. 1 is 15 parts kosher salt, 1 part sodium
   nitrite.

How to Use Curing Salts for Curing and Smoking
==============================================

General
-------

-  Label all meats in the curing process precisely, noting any special
   instructions and the date(s) they need attention (turning, refreshing
   the brine or dry rub, smoking, etc.). Transcribe the dates to your
   calendar.
-  Unless air-drying, always hold meat at temperatures between 36°F and
   40°F.
-  To avoid excessive saltiness, soak cured meats or fish in cold water,
   then air dry before smoking or barbecueing.
-  Avoid the “guy syndrome,” which holds that if some is good, more is
   better (e.g., hot sauce, bourbon, wood chips, etc.). When it comes to
   curing salts, use only the recommended quantities. Store them in the
   original containers and scrupulously follow the directions on the
   package. Again, when not used properly, nitrates and nitrites can be
   toxic.

Dry-Curing
----------

-  When using curing salts in a dry rub, mix thoroughly with the other
   dry ingredients before applying to the meat or fish.
-  Salt draws moisture out of proteins. If dry-curing, routinely drain
   off any liquids that accumulate.
-  Turn the food curing in your refrigerator once a day.
-  Divide dry rubs into batches and reapply the rub every three days or
   so. This is called “overhauling.”

Brining
-------

-  When brining, ensure the protein is fully submersed in the brining
   solution by weighting it with a dinner plate or tightly sealed bags
   of ice. (Replace as needed.)
-  Use nonreactive containers or sturdy resealable plastic bags when
   curing pork bellies, beef brisket, jerky, etc.
-  If brining for longer than seven days, replace the brine with a fresh
   mixture to avoid spoilage.
